tidyclust announcement post (#611)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/tidyclust-0-1-0/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: tidyclust-0-1-0
title: tidyclust is on CRAN
date: 2022-12-06
author: Emil Hvitfeldt
description: >
    Tidyclust is on CRAN. tidyclust provides a common interface for specifying 
    clustering models, in the same style as parsnip.

photo:

>   url: https://unsplash.com/photos/4Xy08NbMBLM

Reviewer: Love it. :)

  author: Ankush Minda

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [package] 
tags: [tidymodels, tidyclust]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [X] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [X] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [X] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [X] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [X] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [X] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [X] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [X] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [X] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

> We're very pleased to announce the release of [tidyclust](https://tidyclust.tidymodels.org/) 0.1.0. tidyclust is the tidymodels extension to fit and use clustering models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're very pleased to announce the release of [tidyclust](https://tidyclust.tidymodels.org/) 0.1.0. tidyclust is the tidymodels extension for working with clustering models.
```

I'm not big on my phrasing either, but "use" felt a bit off to me

You can install it from CRAN with:

```{r, eval = FALSE}

> install.packages("{package}")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
install.packages("tidyclust")
```

```

> This blog post will introduce tidyclust, how to use it with the rest of tidymodels, and how we can interact and evaluate the fitted cluster models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This blog post will introduce tidyclust, how to use it with the rest of tidymodels, and how we can interact and evaluate the fitted clustering models.
```

You mostly use "clustering" elsewhere in this post—if these refer to the same thing, I'd choose one phrasing or the other. :)

```{r setup}
library(tidymodels)
library(tidyclust)
```

> ## Specifying cluster models

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Specifying clustering models
```

> The first thing we need to do is decide on the type of clustering model we want to fit. The pkgdown site provides a [list of all clustering specifications](https://tidyclust.tidymodels.org/reference/index.html#specifications) provided by tidyclust. We are slowly adding more types of models and [suggestions in issues](https://github.com/tidymodels/tidyclust/issues) are highly welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we need to do is decide on the type of clustering model we want to fit. The pkgdown site provides a [list of all clustering specifications](https://tidyclust.tidymodels.org/reference/index.html#specifications) provided by tidyclust. We are slowly adding more types of models—[suggestions in issues](https://github.com/tidymodels/tidyclust/issues) are highly welcome!
```

I read this as "We are slowly adding... suggestions" at first

> We will use a K-Means model for these examples using `k_means()` to create a specification. tidyclust as with the rest of tidymodels tries to use informative names for functions and arguments, so we will be using `num_clusters` instead of `k`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use a K-Means model for these examples using `k_means()` to create a specification. As with other packages in the tidymodels, tidyclust tries to make use of informative names for functions and arguments; as such, the argument denoting the number of clusters is `num_clusters` rather than `k`.
```

I tried to keep the messaging the same here while shifting some phrasing, but, as it stands, I think this sentence begs the question of why the function _name_ uses `k` and _argument_ uses `num_clusters`. I'm not sure what changes I'd recommend there.🙃

Author: that is a little tricky, I do think your suggestions are an improvement

```{r}
kmeans_spec <- k_means(num_clusters = 4) %>%
  set_engine("ClusterR")
kmeans_spec
```

> We can use the `set_engine()`, `set_mode()`, and `set_args()` we are familiar with from parsnip. The specification itself isn't worth much if we don't apply it to some data. We will use the ames data set from the modeldata package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use the `set_engine()`, `set_mode()`, and `set_args()` functions we are familiar with from parsnip. The specification itself isn't worth much if we don't apply it to some data. We will use the ames data set from the modeldata package
```

```{r}
data("ames", package = "modeldata")
```

> this data set contains a number of categorical variables that unaltered can't be used with a k-means model. Some light preprocessing can be done using the recipes package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data set contains a number of categorical variables that unaltered can't be used with a K-Means model. Some light preprocessing can be done using the recipes package.
```

You capitalize the "K" and "M" earlier on the post—either works, but be consistent. :)

```{r}
rec_spec <- recipe(~ ., data = ames) %>%
  step_dummy(all_nominal_predictors()) %>%
  step_zv(all_predictors()) %>%
  step_normalize(all_numeric_predictors()) %>%
  step_pca(all_numeric_predictors(), threshold = 0.8)
```

> This recipe ensures that all the variables are numeric, normalized and have PCA applied to them to remove some of the correlation and number of features. Notice how we didn't specify an outcome as clustering models are unsupervised, meaning that we don't have outcomes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This recipe normalizes all of the numeric variables before applying PCA to create a more minimal set of uncorrelated features. Notice how we didn't specify an outcome as clustering models are unsupervised, meaning that we don't have outcomes.
```

These two specifications can be combined in a `workflow()` 

```{r}
kmeans_wf <- workflow(rec_spec, kmeans_spec)
```

> And fit them together

Reviewer: I would transition this to a complete sentence.

> These two specifications can be combined in a `workflow()` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two specifications can be combined in a `workflow()`.
```

```{r}
kmeans_fit <- fit(kmeans_wf, data = ames)
kmeans_fit
```

> We have arbitrarily set the number of clusters to 4 above. But if we wanted to figure out what values would be "optimal" we would have to fit multiple models. We can do this with `tune_cluster()`, for this we need to use `tune()` to specify that `num_clusters` is the argument we want to try with multiple values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have arbitrarily set the number of clusters to 4 above. If we wanted to figure out what values would be "optimal," we would have to fit multiple models. We can do this with `tune_cluster()`; to make use of this function, though, we first need to use `tune()` to specify that `num_clusters` is the argument we want to try with multiple values
```

```{r}
kmeans_spec <- kmeans_spec %>% 
  set_args(num_clusters = tune())

kmeans_wf <- workflow(rec_spec, kmeans_spec)
kmeans_wf
```

> Using bootstraps to fit multiple models for each value of `num_clusters` and we can use `tune_cluster` much the same way we use `tune_grid()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use `tune_cluster()` in the same way we use `tune_grid()`, using bootstraps to fit multiple models for each value of `num_clusters`
```

```{r}
set.seed(1234)
boots <- bootstraps(ames, times = 10)

tune_res <- tune_cluster(
  kmeans_wf,
  resamples = boots
)
```

> and the respective `collect_*()` functions work as with tune output

Reviewer: You capitalize the analogous "and" in a previous line. I would probably transition this to a full sentence. :)

```{r}
collect_metrics(tune_res)
```

## Extraction

> Going back to the first model with fit, in tidyclust there are 3 main things we can do with a fitted cluster model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Going back to the first model we fit, tidyclust provides three main tools for interfacing with a fitted cluster model:
```

- extract cluster assignments
- extract centroid locations
- prediction with new data

> Each of these tasks has a function associated with them. First, we have `extract_cluster_assignment()`, which can be used on fitted tidyclust objects, alone or as a part of a workflow and it returns the cluster assignment as a factor named `.cluster`in a tibble.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these tasks has a function associated with them. First, we have `extract_cluster_assignment()`, which can be used on fitted tidyclust objects, alone or as a part of a workflow, and it returns the cluster assignment as a factor named `.cluster` in a tibble.
```

```{r}
extract_cluster_assignment(kmeans_fit)
```

> The location of the clusters can be found using `extract_centroids()` which again returns a tibble, with `.cluster` being a factor with the same levels as earlier.

Reviewer: Does "earlier" mean in the structure from the training data?

Author: good note! gonna clarify

```{r}
extract_centroids(kmeans_fit)
```

> Lastly, if the model has a notion that translates to "prediction", then `predict()` will give you those results as well. In the case of K-means, this is being interpreted as "which centroid is this observation closest to".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, if the model has a notion that translates to "prediction," then `predict()` will give you those results as well. In the case of K-Means, this is being interpreted as "which centroid is this observation closest to."
```

Same note on the "K" and "M"

```{r}
predict(kmeans_fit, new_data = slice_sample(ames, n = 10))
```

> Please check the [pkgdown site](https://tidyclust.tidymodels.org/) for more in-depth articles.

Reviewer: Possibly also include something here reiterating excitement about having this package out on CRAN and encouraging folks to check it out?
